README.md, before:

# Klassic: A Programming Language which enables Object-Functional Programming

[![Build Status](https://travis-ci.org/klassic/klassic.png?branch=master)](https://travis-ci.org/klassic/klassic)

Klassic is yet another statically typed programming language.  Klassic has: 

* Powerful Type System
  * based on Hindley-Milner type system
  * support object system based on row polymorphism
* Lexically-scoped Variables
* First-class Functions
* String Interpolation
  * found in Ruby, Scala, Kotlin, etc.
* Loop Expression
  * `while` and `foreach`
* Cleanup Expression
* Space-sensitive and Line-sensitive Syntax
  * list literals
  * map literals
  * set literals
* Java FFI
* , etc.

Klassic will enable object-functional programming.

## Syntax

### Variable Declaration

```
val one = 1
```

Declare variable `one` and `one` is bound to `1`.  You can omit
semicolon(`;`) at the last of the declaration:

```
val name = expression [;]
```

A variable declared by `val` cannot change its value.  If you want to change the value of
the variable, use `mutable` instead:

```
mutable i = 1
i = i + 1 // OK
let j = 1
// j = j + 1 NG
```

### Function Literal

```
val add = (x, y) => x + y
```

Declare variable `add` and `add` is bounded to **the function literal** that
calculates `x + y`.  If an anonymous function has block body, you can write as
the following:

```
val printAndAdd = (x, y) => {
  println(x)
  println(y)
  x + y
}
```

Note that semicolon at the end of each expression of block can be omitted.

### Named Function

If you want to define recursive functions, anonymous function literal cannot be used.
Instead, you can use the notation for recursive functions:

```
def fact(n) = if(n < 2) 1 else n * fact(n - 1)
fact(0) // 1
fact(1) // 1
fact(2) // 2
fact(3) // 6
fact(4) // 24
fact(5) // 120
// The result of type inference of fact is : Int => Int
```

### Method Invocation

```
val list = new java.util.ArrayList
list->add(1)
list->add(2)
list->add(3)
list->add(4)
println(list)
```

Currently, only method invocations to Java objects are acceptable.  Boxing of primitive types 
is automatically done.

### Function Invocation

```
val add = (x, y) => x + y
println(add(1, 2))
```

A function can be invoked as the form `fun(p1, p2, ..., pn)`.  The evaluation
result of `fun` must be a function object.

### List Literal

```
val list1 = [1, 2, 3, 4, 5]
println(list1)
```

A list literal can be expressed as the form `[e1, e2, ...,en]`.  Note that
separator characters have also line feeds and spaces in Klassic unlike other programming languages.

```
val list2 = [
  1
  2
  3
  4
  5
]
println(list2)
val list3 = [[1 2 3]
             [4 5 6]
             [7 8 9]]
```

The type of list literal is a instance of special type constructor `List<'a>`.

### Map Literal

```
val map = %["A": 1, "B": 2]
map Map#get "A" // => 1
map Map#get "B" // => 2
map Map#get "C" // => null
```

A map literal can be expressed as the form `%[k1:v1, ..., kn:vn]` (`kn` and `vn` are expressions).  Note that
separator characters also include line feeds and spaces in Klassic unlike other programmign languages:

```
val map2 = %[
  "A" : 1
  "b" : 2
]
```

The type of map literal is a instance of special type constructor `Map<'k, 'v>`.

### Set Literal

A map literal can be expressed as the form `%(v1, ..., vn)` (`vn` are expressions).  Note that
separator characters also include line feeds and spaces in Klassic unlike other programmign languages:

```
val set1 = %(1, 2, 3)
```

```
val set2 = %(1 2 3) // space is omitted
```

```
val set3 = %(
  1
  2
  3
)
```

The type of set literal is a instance of special type constructor `Set<'a>`.

### Cleanup Expression

Cleanup clauses are executed after the blocks are executed.  For example,

```
val i = 0
while(i < 10) {
  i = i + 1
} cleanup {
  println(i)
}
```

the above program prints `10`.  Each block can at most one cleanup clause.

### Numeric Literal

Klassic supports various literal.  The followings are explanations:

### Int

```
println(100)
println(200)
println(300)
```

The max value of Int literals is `Int.MaxValue` in Scala and the min value of integer literals is 
`Int.MinValue` in Scala.

### Byte

The suffix of byte literal is `BY`.  The max value of long literals is `Byte.MaxValue` in Scala and 
the min value of long literals is `Byte.MinValue` in Scala.

```
println(127BY)
println(-127BY)
println(100BY)
```

### Short

The suffix of short literal is `S`.  The max value of long literals is `Short.MaxValue` in Scala and 
the min value of long literals is `Short.MinValue` in Scala.

```
println(100S)
println(200S)
println(300S)
```

### Long

```
println(100L)
println(200L)
println(300L)
```

The suffix of long literal is `L`.  The max value of long literals is `Long.MaxValue` in Scala and 
the min value of long literals is `Long.MinValue` in Scala.

### Double

```
println(1.0)
println(1.5)
```

The max value of double literal is `Double.MaxValue` in Scala and the min value of double literal is `Double.MinValue`
in Scala.

### Float

```
println(1.0F)
println(1.5F)
```

The max value of float literal is `Float.MaxValue` in Scala and the min value of float literal is `Float.MinValue`
in Scala.

### Comment

Klassic provides two kinds of comment

### (Nestable) Block Comment

```
1 + /* nested
  /* comment */ here */ 2 // => 3
```

### Line comment

```
1 + // comment
    2 // => 3
```

## Type System

Klassic is a statically-typed programming language.  A characteristic of type
system of Klassic is `restricted` subtyping.  `restricted` means that implicit
upcast is not allowed and it must be specified explicitly if you need it.

### Hindley-Milner Type Inference

Klassic's type inference is based on HM.  It means that type annotations
is not required in many cases:

```
def fold_left(list) = (z) => (f) => {
  if(isEmpty(list)) z else fold_left(tail(list))(f(z, head(list)))(f)
}
// The result of type inference: List<'a> => 'b => (('b, 'a) => 'b) => 'b
```

### Row Polymorphism

Klassic has simple object system based on row polymorphism.  For example,

```
def add(o) = {
  o.x + o.y
}
```

the type of above program is inferred:

```
add: { x: Int; y: Int; ... } 
```

It means that `add` function accepts any object that has field `x` and field `y`.
Although it is not subtyping strictly, many situations that need subtyping are
covered.

### Type Cast

In some cases, escape hatches from type system are required. In such cases,
user can insert cast explicitly.

```
val s: * = (100 :> *) // 100 is casted to dynamic type ( `*` )
```

Commit message:

Update README for 0.1.0-alpha release

README.md, after:

# Klassic: A Programming Language which enables Object-Functional Programming

[![Build Status](https://travis-ci.org/klassic/klassic.png?branch=master)](https://travis-ci.org/klassic/klassic)

Klassic is yet another statically typed programming language.  Klassic has: 

* Powerful Type System
  * based on Hindley-Milner type system
  * support object system based on row polymorphism
* Lexically-scoped Variables
* First-class Functions
* String Interpolation
  * found in Ruby, Scala, Kotlin, etc.
* Loop Expression
  * `while` and `foreach`
* Cleanup Expression
* Space-sensitive and Line-sensitive Syntax
  * list literals
  * map literals
  * set literals
* Java FFI
* , etc.

Klassic will enable object-functional programming.

## Instalattion and Quick Start
It requires Java 8 or later.

You can download the binary distribution (executable jar) from the [release page](https://github.com/klassic/klassic/releases/tag/releases%2Fv0.1.0-alpha).  Put the file on an directory and execute the klassic.jar by `java -jar` command:

```
$ java -jar klassic.jar

Usage: java -jar klassic.jar (-f <fileName> | -e <expression>)
<fileName>   : read a program from <fileName> and execute it
-e <expression> : evaluate <expression>
```

Write the folowing lines and save it to `hello.kl`

```scala
println("Hello, World!")
```

And run the interpreter by `java -jar klassic.jar hello.kl`:

```
$ java -jar klassic.jar hello.kl

Hello, World!
```

## Syntax

### Variable Declaration

```
val one = 1
```

Declare variable `one` and `one` is bound to `1`.  You can omit
semicolon(`;`) at the last of the declaration:

```
val name = expression [;]
```

A variable declared by `val` cannot change its value.  If you want to change the value of
the variable, use `mutable` instead:

```
mutable i = 1
i = i + 1 // OK
let j = 1
// j = j + 1 NG
```

### Function Literal

```
val add = (x, y) => x + y
```

Declare variable `add` and `add` is bounded to **the function literal** that
calculates `x + y`.  If an anonymous function has block body, you can write as
the following:

```
val printAndAdd = (x, y) => {
  println(x)
  println(y)
  x + y
}
```

Note that semicolon at the end of each expression of block can be omitted.

### Named Function

If you want to define recursive functions, anonymous function literal cannot be used.
Instead, you can use the notation for recursive functions:

```
def fact(n) = if(n < 2) 1 else n * fact(n - 1)
fact(0) // 1
fact(1) // 1
fact(2) // 2
fact(3) // 6
fact(4) // 24
fact(5) // 120
// The result of type inference of fact is : Int => Int
```

### Method Invocation

```
val list = new java.util.ArrayList
list->add(1)
list->add(2)
list->add(3)
list->add(4)
println(list)
```

Currently, only method invocations to Java objects are acceptable.  Boxing of primitive types 
is automatically done.

### Function Invocation

```
val add = (x, y) => x + y
println(add(1, 2))
```

A function can be invoked as the form `fun(p1, p2, ..., pn)`.  The evaluation
result of `fun` must be a function object.

### List Literal

```
val list1 = [1, 2, 3, 4, 5]
println(list1)
```

A list literal can be expressed as the form `[e1, e2, ...,en]`.  Note that
separator characters have also line feeds and spaces in Klassic unlike other programming languages.

```
val list2 = [
  1
  2
  3
  4
  5
]
println(list2)
val list3 = [[1 2 3]
             [4 5 6]
             [7 8 9]]
```

The type of list literal is a instance of special type constructor `List<'a>`.

### Map Literal

```
val map = %["A": 1, "B": 2]
map Map#get "A" // => 1
map Map#get "B" // => 2
map Map#get "C" // => null
```

A map literal can be expressed as the form `%[k1:v1, ..., kn:vn]` (`kn` and `vn` are expressions).  Note that
separator characters also include line feeds and spaces in Klassic unlike other programmign languages:

```
val map2 = %[
  "A" : 1
  "b" : 2
]
```

The type of map literal is a instance of special type constructor `Map<'k, 'v>`.

### Set Literal

A map literal can be expressed as the form `%(v1, ..., vn)` (`vn` are expressions).  Note that
separator characters also include line feeds and spaces in Klassic unlike other programmign languages:

```
val set1 = %(1, 2, 3)
```

```
val set2 = %(1 2 3) // space is omitted
```

```
val set3 = %(
  1
  2
  3
)
```

The type of set literal is a instance of special type constructor `Set<'a>`.

### Cleanup Expression

Cleanup clauses are executed after the blocks are executed.  For example,

```
val i = 0
while(i < 10) {
  i = i + 1
} cleanup {
  println(i)
}
```

the above program prints `10`.  Each block can at most one cleanup clause.

### Numeric Literal

Klassic supports various literal.  The followings are explanations:

### Int

```
println(100)
println(200)
println(300)
```

The max value of Int literals is `Int.MaxValue` in Scala and the min value of integer literals is 
`Int.MinValue` in Scala.

### Byte

The suffix of byte literal is `BY`.  The max value of long literals is `Byte.MaxValue` in Scala and 
the min value of long literals is `Byte.MinValue` in Scala.

```
println(127BY)
println(-127BY)
println(100BY)
```

### Short

The suffix of short literal is `S`.  The max value of long literals is `Short.MaxValue` in Scala and 
the min value of long literals is `Short.MinValue` in Scala.

```
println(100S)
println(200S)
println(300S)
```

### Long

```
println(100L)
println(200L)
println(300L)
```

The suffix of long literal is `L`.  The max value of long literals is `Long.MaxValue` in Scala and 
the min value of long literals is `Long.MinValue` in Scala.

### Double

```
println(1.0)
println(1.5)
```

The max value of double literal is `Double.MaxValue` in Scala and the min value of double literal is `Double.MinValue`
in Scala.

### Float

```
println(1.0F)
println(1.5F)
```

The max value of float literal is `Float.MaxValue` in Scala and the min value of float literal is `Float.MinValue`
in Scala.

### Comment

Klassic provides two kinds of comment

### (Nestable) Block Comment

```
1 + /* nested
  /* comment */ here */ 2 // => 3
```

### Line comment

```
1 + // comment
    2 // => 3
```

## Type System

Klassic is a statically-typed programming language.  A characteristic of type
system of Klassic is `restricted` subtyping.  `restricted` means that implicit
upcast is not allowed and it must be specified explicitly if you need it.

### Hindley-Milner Type Inference

Klassic's type inference is based on HM.  It means that type annotations
is not required in many cases:

```
def fold_left(list) = (z) => (f) => {
  if(isEmpty(list)) z else fold_left(tail(list))(f(z, head(list)))(f)
}
// The result of type inference: List<'a> => 'b => (('b, 'a) => 'b) => 'b
```

### Row Polymorphism

Klassic has simple object system based on row polymorphism.  For example,

```
def add(o) = {
  o.x + o.y
}
```

the type of above program is inferred:

```
add: { x: Int; y: Int; ... } 
```

It means that `add` function accepts any object that has field `x` and field `y`.
Although it is not subtyping strictly, many situations that need subtyping are
covered.

### Type Cast

In some cases, escape hatches from type system are required. In such cases,
user can insert cast explicitly.

```
val s: * = (100 :> *) // 100 is casted to dynamic type ( `*` )
```
